---
title: "DummyWheel/en"
slug: "dummywheel"
lang: "en"

source_wiki_title: "DummyWheel/en"
source_hash: "3d59e819d003bb3623e0312367e315e4"
last_synced: "2026-04-09T20:02:20.019957+00:00"
last_processed: "2026-04-10T06:10:49.675795+00:00"

tags:
  - software

keywords:
  []

status:
  downloaded: true
  converted: true
  tagged: true
  keywords_generated: false
  ragflow_synced: false
  qa_generated: false
---

Dummy Wheel exists in the wheelhouse to provide placeholders for some popular Python packages that are available on PyPI but as modules on our infrastructure. They are all tagged with a local version (`dummy`), for instance: `pyarrow-23.0.1+dummy.computecanada-py3-none-any.whl`.

Such examples are:
* [pyarrow (Arrow)](arrow.md#pyarrow)
* [opencv_python (OpenCV)](opencv.md#python-bindings)
* [MPI4py](mpi4py.md)

When a dummy wheel is selected by pip it will raise the error below since pip could not find a match for this requirement.

## Troubleshooting
## This is a normal error generated by this dummy wheel.

!!! note
    In the case below, `pyarrow` is used as an example but the same applies to other packages as well.

When `pyarrow` dependency is not met, an error will be raised when the dummy wheel is selected. **This is normal**.
This means that either:
1. the arrow module was not loaded, hence pip could not find pyarrow
2. the arrow version loaded does not meet the requested version from the dependent package
3. the arrow module loaded does not support the python version used

### Module not loaded
In this case, deactivate any virtual environment, load the module, re-activate the virtual environment, and re-run your pip install command.

1. Deactivate your virtual environment :
```bash
test $VIRTUAL_ENV && deactivate
```

2. Load the Arrow module :
```bash
module load gcc arrow/x.y.z python/x.y.z
```
where `x.y.z` is the version needed.

3. Re-activate your previously created virtual env. :
```bash
source <env>/bin/activate
```

4. And re-run your pip install command.
```bash
pip install <package>
```

### Package/module version
The arrow module loaded does not meet the requirement. For instance, `(from pyarrow>=21.0.0->datasets)` which means that this version of the datasets package requires `pyarrow` greater or equal to version `21.0.0`.

In other words, using any prior version with this version of datasets will results in the dummy wheel being installed.

You can find the asked requirement (version) by looking at the line (`pyarrow_noinstall`)
```bash
pip install --no-index datasets
...
Processing /cvmfs/soft.computecanada.ca/custom/python/wheelhouse/generic/pyarrow_noinstall-9999+dummy.computecanada.tar.gz (from pyarrow>=21.0.0->datasets)
```

### No Python bindings

The loaded module may not have the python bindings for the python module loaded.
You can quickly verify by using:
```bash
python -c "import pyarrow"
```
If the command displays nothing, the import was successful and the module provide `pyarrow` for the python module used.

Or one can check if pip sees it:
```bash
pip list | grep pyarrow
pyarrow    23.0.0
```

If `pip list` show an entry, then `pyarrow` is available and seen by `pip`. Otherwise, in case of no entry, `pyarrow` is not available.