---
title: "OpenCV"
tags:
  []

keywords:
  []
---

[OpenCV](https://opencv.org/) (Open Source Computer Vision Library) is a library of programming functions mainly aimed at real-time computer vision.

## CUDA 
OpenCV is also available with CUDA.

```bash
module load gcc cuda opencv/X.Y.Z
```

where <TT>X.Y.Z</TT> represent the desired version.

## Extra modules 
The module also contains the [extra modules (contrib)](https://github.com/opencv/opencv_contrib/tree/4.x/modules#an-overview-of-the-opencv_contrib-modules).

## Python bindings 
The module contains bindings for multiple Python versions. 
To know which are the compatible Python versions, run

```bash
module spider opencv/X.Y.Z
```

Or search directly <i>opencv_python</i>, by running

```bash
module spider opencv_python/X.Y.Z
```

where <TT>X.Y.Z</TT> represent the desired version.

### Usage 
1. Load the required modules.

```bash
module load gcc opencv/X.Y.Z python scipy-stack
```

where <TT>X.Y.Z</TT> represent the desired version.

2. Import OpenCV.

```bash
python -c "import cv2"
```

If the command displays nothing, the import was successful.

#### Available Python packages  
Other Python packages depend on OpenCV bindings in order to be installed.
OpenCV provides four different packages:
* `opencv_python`
* `opencv_contrib_python`
* `opencv_python_headless`
* `opencv_contrib_python_headless`

```bash

```
 grep opencv
|result=
opencv-contrib-python              4.5.5                  
opencv-contrib-python-headless     4.5.5                  
opencv-python                      4.5.5                  
opencv-python-headless             4.5.5 
}}

With the `opencv` module loaded, your package dependency for one of the OpenCV named will be satisfied.

## Use with OpenEXR 
In order to read EXR files with OpenCV, the module must be activated through an environment variable.

```bash

```
1 python <file>}}

= Troubleshooting =  

## This is a normal error generated by this dummy wheel. 
See [This is a normal error generated by this dummy wheel](dummywheel#this_is_a_normal_error_generated_by_this_dummy_wheel.md).

## ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'cv2' 
When importing <tt>cv2</tt>, one may get the following error:

```bash
python -c "import cv2"
```

```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<string>", line 1, in <module>
ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'cv2'
```

This usually means one of the two following cases:
# [A module for OpenCV was not loaded](#module-opencv-not-loaded.md)
# [A python module was not loaded](#python-module-not-loaded.md)

### Module OpenCV not loaded 
Find a *compatible* <tt>OpenCV</tt> module and load it. See [#Python bindings](#python-bindings.md)

### Python module not loaded 
When omitting to load a Python module, and activating a virtual environment, the python bindings will not be available, hence resulting in <tt>cv2</tt> not seen.

To remedy:

1. Deactivate any Python virtual environment.

```bash
test $VIRTUAL_ENV && deactivate
```

<b>Note:</b> If you had a virtual environment activated, it is important to deactivate it first, then load the module, before reactivating your virtual environment.

2. Load the module.

```bash
module load opencv/x.y.z python/x.y.z
```

3. Check that it is visible by `pip`

```bash

```
 grep opencv
|result=
opencv_python            4.13.0
}}
and is accessible for your currently loaded python module.

```bash
python -c 'import cv2'
```

If no errors are raised, then everything is OK!